.. _tutorial_blackwell_matmul_v3:

3. Warp Specialization
======================

In :doc:`V2 <v2>`, each iteration issues one MMA and waits for it to complete
(via ``tcgen05.commit`` + ``mbarrier.wait``) before issuing the next. The tensor
core MMA pipeline sees only one operation at a time --- it goes idle between
consecutive MMAs while the warp handles TMA and synchronization.

To keep the MMA pipeline busy, we want **multiple MMAs in flight**: issue the
next MMA as soon as its input data is ready, without waiting for the previous
MMA to finish writing its results. This is achieved through **warp
specialization** --- assigning TMA and MMA to **separate warps**, each running
its own loop. The MMA warp can issue MMA after MMA without interruption, while
the TMA warp independently keeps shared memory filled. The two warps synchronize
only through mbarriers, allowing multiple in-flight MMA and TMA operations
simultaneously.


The Full Kernel
---------------

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: @tilus.autotune
   :end-at: self.tcgen05.dealloc(t_acc)
   :caption: BlackwellMatmulV3 --- full kernel


What Changed from V2
--------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 40 40

   * -
     - V2
     - V3
   * - **Warp structure**
     - Single warp does both TMA and MMA
     - TMA warp + MMA warp (warp specialization)
   * - **Barriers**
     - TMA barriers + 1 MMA barrier
     - ``full_barriers`` + ``empty_barriers`` (producer-consumer)
   * - **Parallelism**
     - TMA and MMA overlap across iterations
     - TMA and MMA run **truly in parallel** on separate warps
   * - **In-flight MMA**
     - 1 (wait after each MMA)
     - Multiple (MMA warp issues next MMA without waiting for TMA)
   * - **Prefill**
     - Explicit prefill loop
     - Implicit: TMA warp runs ahead of MMA warp


Warp Specialization
-------------------

.. |rarr| unicode:: U+2192

In V2, a single warp handles both TMA and MMA. Each iteration looks like: issue
TMA |rarr| wait for TMA |rarr| issue MMA |rarr| **wait for MMA** |rarr| repeat.
The ``tcgen05.commit`` + ``mbarrier.wait`` after each MMA means the tensor core
pipeline sees at most one MMA at a time. Between consecutive MMAs, the pipeline
goes idle while the warp handles synchronization, TMA issuing, and TMA waiting.

With warp specialization, we assign TMA and MMA to **separate warps**, each
running its own loop:

- **TMA warp** (threads 0--31): issues TMA loads back-to-back. Before each load,
  it only waits on ``empty_barriers`` to ensure the shared memory slot is free.
- **MMA warp** (threads 32--63): issues MMA operations back-to-back. Before each
  MMA, it only waits on ``full_barriers`` to ensure the input data has arrived.
  Crucially, it does **not** wait for the previous MMA to complete --- it issues
  ``tcgen05.commit(mbarrier=empty_barriers[stage])`` which returns immediately
  and makes the barrier track the MMA's completion in the background. When the
  MMA actually finishes, the hardware will signal the barrier, freeing the stage
  for the TMA warp. Meanwhile, the MMA warp has already moved on to the next
  iteration. This allows **multiple MMAs to be in flight** in the tensor core
  pipeline.

The result: as long as TMA delivers data fast enough, the MMA warp keeps the
tensor core pipeline fully occupied with no idle gaps between operations.


Producer-Consumer Barriers
--------------------------

V2 used TMA barriers and a single MMA barrier. V3 replaces them with a
**producer-consumer** barrier pair, as described in the
:doc:`mbarrier guide </python-api/instruction-groups/mbarrier>`:

- ``full_barriers``: signaled when TMA has filled a stage (data ready).
  The MMA warp waits on these.
- ``empty_barriers``: signaled when MMA has consumed a stage (slot free).
  The TMA warp waits on these.

.. code-block:: python

   full_barriers = self.mbarrier.alloc(counts=[1] * self.stages)
   empty_barriers = self.mbarrier.alloc(counts=[1] * self.stages)

The initial phases reflect the starting state:

- ``empty_phases`` are initialized to ``1``
  (:attr:`~tilus.lang.instructions.mbarrier.BarrierInstructionGroup.producer_initial_phase`):
  all stages start empty, so the TMA warp can begin filling immediately.
- ``full_phases`` are initialized to ``0``
  (:attr:`~tilus.lang.instructions.mbarrier.BarrierInstructionGroup.consumer_initial_phase`):
  no stages are full yet, so the MMA warp blocks until the first TMA completes.


Flush Barrier
-------------

After the MMA loop ends, we need to ensure all in-flight MMAs have completed
before reading the accumulator. This is done with a **flush barrier**:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: # drain: wait for all in-flight MMA
   :end-at: self.mbarrier.wait(flush_barrier
   :dedent: 12

This extra ``tcgen05.commit`` makes the ``flush_barrier`` track all prior
uncommitted MMA operations. Once the barrier completes, it is safe to read
from tensor memory.


Walkthrough
-----------

TMA Warp (Producer)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: # TMA warp (producer)
   :end-before: # MMA warp (consumer)
   :dedent: 8
   :caption: TMA warp

The TMA warp runs a loop over all K-tiles:

- :meth:`mbarrier.wait <tilus.lang.instructions.mbarrier.BarrierInstructionGroup.wait>`
  on ``empty_barriers[stage]`` blocks until the MMA warp has freed this stage.
- :meth:`mbarrier.arrive_and_expect_tx <tilus.lang.instructions.mbarrier.BarrierInstructionGroup.arrive_and_expect_tx>`
  on ``full_barriers[stage]`` declares the expected TMA bytes.
- Two :meth:`tma.global_to_shared <tilus.lang.instructions.tma.TmaInstructionGroup.global_to_shared>`
  calls load the A and B tiles.
- The stage index advances modulo ``stages``.

Note there is no explicit prefill loop as in V2: the TMA warp simply starts
running and naturally gets ahead of the MMA warp (which blocks until the first
``full_barrier`` is signaled).


MMA Warp (Consumer)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py
   :language: python
   :start-at: # MMA warp (consumer)
   :end-before: self.sync()
   :dedent: 8
   :caption: MMA warp

The MMA warp runs a matching loop:

- :meth:`mbarrier.wait <tilus.lang.instructions.mbarrier.BarrierInstructionGroup.wait>`
  on ``full_barriers[stage]`` blocks until TMA data has arrived.
- :meth:`tcgen05.mma <tilus.lang.instructions.tcgen05.Tcgen05InstructionGroup.mma>`
  computes on the loaded tiles.
- :meth:`tcgen05.commit <tilus.lang.instructions.tcgen05.Tcgen05InstructionGroup.commit>`
  on ``empty_barriers[stage]`` signals that this stage is now free for the TMA
  warp to reuse.
- After the loop, the flush barrier ensures all MMA writes to tensor memory are
  complete.


What's Next
-----------

V3 achieves true overlap between TMA and MMA through warp specialization.
However, the code still manages the pipeline state (stages, barriers, phases)
inline, which becomes increasingly complex as we add more features.

In the next version, we refactor the pipeline logic into reusable **helper
classes** (``Pipeline``, ``LoadWorker``, ``MmaWorker``) using ``tilus.Class``,
and add a TMA-based **epilogue** for writing results back to global memory.


Full Source
-----------

The complete example file is located at
`examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py <https://github.com/NVIDIA/tilus/blob/main/examples/blackwell_matmul/matmul_v3.py>`__.
